# Device Ops Application

iobeam provides library support for common operations associated with
DeviceOps, including stateful series processing with filtering and
triggers.

The input to a DeviceOps application is a stream of measurements
(e.g., cpu, battery levels, memory consumption, etc.), while the
output will be a derived stream (the result of processing and
filtering the incoming measurement stream) and a stream of [events to
be triggered](https://docs.iobeam.com/triggering-on-data).

This library provides a *DeviceOpsConfigBuilder* that allows one to
perform simple stream processing in just a few lines of configuration,
including common stateful transformations (e.g., computing
exponentially-weighted moving averages, derivations, etc.), filters
(e.g., simple thresholds, time-based stateful conditions, etc.)  and
event generation.

By now, you should have first followed the [setup and installation](README.md#setup) instructions for generating an iobeam Spark app. Once you've done that, you can modify and/or deploy the DeviceOps app.

At this point, you should see the sample device ops app `DeviceOpsApp.scala` in a path that looks something like this:
`/myApp/src/main/scala/com/mycompany/apps/examples/`

## Understanding the Framework

This section break downs the `DeviceOpsApp.scala` example app generated by the `mvn` command.

In general, the core functionality of a device ops application can be
realized using iobeam's ```DeviceOpsConfigBuilder```, which allows one
to chain a series of filters and transformations to generate derived data
streams and trigger events. The full list of supported filters and triggers
can be found in the [Spark Device Ops Library Scaladocs](http://assets.iobeam.com/libs/spark/scala/deviceops/index.html#com.iobeam.spark.streams.package),
with a few examples at the end of this document.

The example app, also shown below, first takes an input stream that includes
a time series of raw `cpu` readings, then smoothes the series using an
exponentially-weighted moving average.

The app also generates various trigger events named:

* *cpu_over_90* when the smoothed series goes above 90%
* *cpu_below_70* when a smoothed series that *had* been above 90% then drops below 70%
* *cpu_over_85_for_5_s* when the smoothed series remains over 85% for more than 5 seconds
* *cpu_restored* when the series that had been above 85% for 5 seconds drops below 70%
* *device_offline* when no data is received from the device in a 5 minute period

```scala
/**
  * Builds a Device Ops app using iobeam library.
  */
@SparkRun("deviceOps")
object DeviceOpsApp extends SparkApp {

    override def main(appContext: AppContext):
    OutputStreams = {

        // Get raw input data
        val stream = appContext.getInputStream

        // Build device ops config
        val config = new DeviceOpsConfigBuilder()
            // smooth the input series cpu with a EWMA filter with alpha 0.2
            .addSeriesFilter("cpu", "cpu_smoothed", new Ewma(0.2))

            // Add a threshold trigger to the series
            .addSeriesTrigger("cpu_smoothed",
                new ThresholdTrigger(90.0, "cpu_over_90",
                                     70.0, "cpu_below_70"))

            // Add a threshold timeout trigger
            .addSeriesTrigger("cpu_smoothed",
                new ThresholdTimeoutTrigger(85.0, 70.0, Seconds(5),
                  "cpu_over_85_for_5_s", "cpu_restored"))

            // Add check of when devices go offline
            .addDeviceTrigger(new DeviceTimeoutTrigger(Minutes(5), "device_offline"))
            .build

        val (outStream, triggers) = DeviceOps.getDeviceOpsOutput(stream, config)

        // Output streams
        OutputStreams(outStream, triggers)
    }
}
```

## Building, Deploying, and Testing your App

To build a device ops app, run `mvn package` from your top-level directory,
as detailed [in the README](README.md#building-an-app). This will create a
JAR file that can be uploaded to iobeam using our [command-line interface](https://github.com/iobeam/iobeam).

E.g., to upload and run the device ops example app:

```
iobeam app create -name deviceOps -path target/myApp-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar

New app created.
App ID: [your_app_id]
App Name: deviceOps
```

### Registering triggers

Once your app is running on iobeam, you can register triggers to get notified
when an event occurs. Please see our [trigger documentation](https://docs.iobeam.com/triggering-on-data)
for more detailed info.

E.g., to send an email to yourself when the example app detects the CPU above 90% (event `cpu_over_90`), use the following command:

```
iobeam trigger create email -name "cpu_over_90" \
  -payload "The CPU of device {{ .deviceId }} is above 90%" \
  -subject "High CPU" -to [your_email_address]
```

And then to test that your trigger works:
```
iobeam trigger test -name "cpu_over_90" -param "deviceId,this-is-just-a-test-device"
```

### Sending test data

For a full end-to-end test, we'll need to send some test data:

```
iobeam device create -id DeviceOps-Test-1
for v in 85 95 99 99 50 ; do
   iobeam import -deviceId DeviceOps-Test-1 -series cpu -value $v ;
done
```

You can verify that this data was received:

```
iobeam query -deviceId DeviceOps-Test-1 -series cpu
```

In fact, you can even query the system to determine when some condition occurs:

```
iobeam query -deviceId DeviceOps-Test-1 -series cpu_over_90

{
  "result": [
    {
      "data": [
        {
          "time": 1460137113326,
          "value": 1.0
        }
      ],
      "device_id": "DeviceOps-Test-1",
      "name": "cpu_over_90",
      "project_id": [your_project_id]
    }
  ],
  "timefmt": "msec"
}
```

For an overall view of the raw data received and derived data created by
the Device Ops app:

```
iobeam query -deviceId DeviceOps-Test-1 -output csv
```

Because the stock example generates an event whenever the device is offline
for more than 5 minutes (which can also be tied to a trigger), you should
stop your app when you are done testing it:

```
iobeam app stop -id [your_app_id]

Requested status: STOPPED. Waiting for current status to change.
Checking app status...RUNNING
Checking app status...STOPPED
Success!
```

If you don't remember your app id, just run:

```
iobeam app list

App ID  : [your_app_id]
App Name: deviceOps
Created : 2016-04-08T14:37:15Z
Requested Status: RUNNING
Current Status  : RUNNING

BUNDLE INFO
URI     : file://telemetryApp-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar
Type    : JAR
Checksum: 2889f37315fcfbd8ba5e780e2d9097fa48e64162a1f0c924f499516548598976 (SHA256)
```

## Modifying the App

Now that we've deployed the stock device ops app, you can now extend the
program according to your needs.  Either edit the example in-place, or
copy the *main* function to `MyApp.scala`.

To redeploy your app, run `mvn clean package` and then run the update command. 
Include the `-name` parameter if you modified the main function in `MyApp.scala`.

```
mvn clean package
iobeam app update -id [your_app_id] -name myApp -path target/myApp-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar
```

There are two main ways to process data streams using the device ops library:

* **Filters**: Filters work on individual series and output a new value on
each sample. They can be attached to the output from other filters but will
then operate on the data from the previous batch.

* **Triggers**: Triggers are evaluated on each sample and output a trigger name
or None. Triggers can be attached to derived series.

## Examples

### Low battery level

A common use of the trigger system is to generate events when a certain metric passes a threshold.
For example when the battery level of a device is below a defined level. To setup a trigger for when
the series named "battery" is below 10%, you set up a ThresholdTrigger:

```scala
new DeviceOpsConfigBuilder()
  .addTrigger("battery", ThresholdTrigger(10.0, "Battery below 10%", 15.0))
  .build
```
where `10.0` is the threshold level (or "low watermark") and `15.0` is the trigger release level (or "high watermark").
This hysteresis means that the trigger will not create multiple events if the battery readings oscillate around the
trigger level (in this case, system will not generate multiple triggers if the battery level rises above/below 10%
but above 15%).

### Monitor when CPU is above threshold and when it goes below another threshold

When monitoring a metric where you are interested both when it enters and leaves a problematic area,
such as high CPU, you configure the threshold trigger:
```scala
new DeviceOpsConfigBuilder()
  .addTrigger("cpu", ThresholdTrigger(90.0, "CPU above 90%", 70.0, "CPU below 70%"))
  .build
```

This will create a trigger event when the CPU readings go above `90%` and another event when the series
go below `70%`.

### High CPU load for extended period

To set a threshold trigger that detects when a series (e.g. `cpu`) is above a threshold longer than a time limit:
```scala
new DeviceOpsConfigBuilder()
  .addTrigger("cpu", ThresholdTimeoutTrigger(70.0, 50.0, Seconds(30), "Above threshold >30s"))
  .build
```

This will create a trigger when CPU readings remove above `70%` without dipping below `50%` for over 30secs.

### Detect quickly changing series

Detecting quick changes in series can be done by connecting a threshold trigger to a derivative filter.
```scala
new DeviceOpsConfigBuilder()
  .addFilter("cpu", "cpu_derived", new DerivativeFilter)
  .addTrigger("cpu_derived", ThresholdTrigger(1.0, "CPU increase high", 0.0, "CPU leveled out"))
  .build
```

As noise on a series can make the derivative very jumpy, a smoothing filter can be applied before
```scala
new DeviceOpsConfigBuilder()
  .addFilter("noisy_series", "smoothed_series", new Ewma(0.1)))
  .addFilter("smoothed_series", "series_derived", new DerivativeFilter)
  .addTrigger("series_derived", new ThresholdTrigger(1.0, "Series increase high", 0.0, "Series leveled out"))
  .build
```

For irregularly sampled series, `EwmaIrregular` can be used instead.  

### Device offline

Detecting when a device has gone offline, i.e., last sent data to iobeam longer than a specific timeout threshold.
```scala
new DeviceOpsConfigBuilder()
  .addDeviceTrigger(new DeviceTimeoutTrigger(Minutes(5), "device_offline"))
  .build
```

# Support
Questions? Please reach out to us at [support@iobeam.com](mailto:support@iobeam.com).
